
 I can truthfully say that I have been using Orchestra90 for
as long as I have been using computers. In fact, I bought my
first Orchestra90 pak at the same  time as I bought my first
16k Tandy Color Computer 2 w/COLOR BASIC. If I remember right,
I paid $69 for the Color Computer 2, and $79 for the Orch90
pak. The reason I bought the Coco was that it was on the sale
display table with an Orch90 pak inserted and playing the 
"William Tell Overture" through one of the Radio Shack stereo
systems. Being a musician, I was interested in the Orch90 as
a song writing tool, so I bought both.

As I learned to use my Coco and eventually working with ML
and EDTASM, I soon realized that I wanted to disassemble the
Orch90 ROM and use the code as a base for writing my own music
software. I made several attempts at this until I eventually
discovered MIDI and moved into the MIDI world, leaving the
Orch90 behind. Through the years, I discovered all the great
wavetable music software written for the Coco and always ended
up 'hacking' the software so that it would play through the 
Orch90's 8-bit stereo DACs instead of the Coco's onboard 8-bit
DAC. I even wrote several 'samplers' that would play my own
recorded samples back through the Orch90's DACs. I even wrote
a "Sample Database" program to use with my "Casio SK-1" that
could record and store 4 short samples onboard. My program
could either resample from the keyboard, or record it's own
sample through the joyport. I could have 2 samples in memory
with a cassette database of samples. The Orch90 was plugged
into the SK-1's mic input, so I could transfer the samples
from the Coco to the SK-1. I even used this software in showa
with my band to use for sound effects in songs. I tried all
the other music software for the Coco, but all the other
wavetable software only used 4 (or less) voices and never
sounded as good as things I did on the Orch90.

Fast forward to 2012, I was working on a "multi-format" music
player for NitrOS9 and after implementing several 'formats',
like "Lyra", ".mid", "Ultimuse3", and "Musica II", I decided
I would love to be able to add an Orch90 song player to my
arsenal of music players. Once again I delved into the
disassembly of the Orchestra90's ROM in hopes of creating a
simple cmd line Orch90 player for NitrOS9. I had most of the
ROM disassembled, but hadn't figured out very much of what the
code was doing. I eventually moved on to other projects, but
writing an Orch90 player was still on my Coco bucket list.

Early last year (2015), one of the guys from the Dragon forum
had seen one of my posts on the Coco mail list about
disassembling the Orch90 code and emailed me and asked if I'd
like to help them with their own disassembly of the code. So
after several exchanges of code, ideas, and changes, we ended
up with a compilable source. I have since worked on commenting
as much of the code as I could.

As it stands now, the Orchestra90 source will compile into an
exact duplicate of the original Orch90 ROM. I still have a few
direct page variables to figure out as well as to comment a
few sections a little better. Figuring out those last few
variables will help to determine what the uncommented sections
are doing and making them easier to comment. 
